A sort is stable if equal elements keep their original relative order after sorting.

Say you have this list of names with scores:
Bob   - 5
Alice - 5
Charlie - 3

Both Bob and Alice have score 5. After sorting by score, a stable sort keeps Bob before Alice because Bob came first originally:
Charlie - 3
Bob     - 5   ← still before Alice
Alice   - 5

An unstable sort might give you:
Charlie - 3
Alice   - 5   ← flipped
Bob     - 5

That's it. Stable just means equal elements don't get reordered relative to each other.




The core idea: a function that calls itself on a smaller version of the same problem.
The confusion usually comes from trying to trace every single call in your head — you go three levels deep and lose track. Don't do that. Instead, recursion works on trust.
The trust trick
When you write a recursive function, you assume it already works for the smaller case. You don't trace it. You just ask two questions:

What's the smallest possible input where I already know the answer without doing any work? → that's your base case.
Assuming the function works for a smaller input, how do I use that to solve my current input? → that's the recursive step.

That's the whole thing. The base case stops the recursion; the recursive step shrinks the problem toward the base case.
Why the base case matters
The base case is the "floor." Without it, the function keeps calling itself on smaller and smaller inputs forever (well — until the stack overflows). Every recursive path must eventually hit a base case. If you ever write a recursive function and it crashes with a stack overflow, 90% of the time it's because either:

you forgot the base case, or
your recursive call isn't actually getting closer to the base case.

Concrete example — factorial
5! = 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1
Notice that 5! = 5 × 4!. The problem contains a smaller version of itself. So:
factorial(n):
    if n == 0:  return 1        // base case: I know this answer outright
    return n * factorial(n - 1) // trust that factorial(n-1) works
When you read factorial(n - 1), do not trace it. Just trust it returns the right answer for n-1. Your only job is: given that smaller answer, how do I build my answer? Multiply by n. Done.
The mental picture: a stack of plates
Each call stacks on top of the previous one, frozen mid-way, waiting for the call below it to finish:
factorial(3)  → needs 3 × factorial(2)
  factorial(2)  → needs 2 × factorial(1)
    factorial(1)  → needs 1 × factorial(0)
      factorial(0)  → returns 1   ← base case, floor hit
    returns 1 × 1 = 1
  returns 2 × 1 = 2
returns 3 × 2 = 6
Calls pile up going down (each waiting), then the base case lets them resolve and "unwind" back up, each one now able to finish its multiplication.
The recipe for writing any recursive function

Identify the base case — the input so small you answer instantly, no recursion.
Assume the function already works for a smaller input (trust it).
Write the one step that combines the current piece with that smaller answer.
Make sure the recursive call moves toward the base case.